# PICO
Analyses associated with

> De Wolfe TJ, Eggers S, Barker AK, Kates AE, Dill-McFarland KA, Suen G, Safdar N. 2018. Oral probiotic combination of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium alters the gastrointestinal microbiota during antibiotic treatment for Clostridium difficile infection. *PLoS One* 13(9):e0204253. doi: [10.1371/journal.pone.0204253](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0204253).

## Abstract
Perturbations in the gastrointestinal microbiome caused by antibiotics are a major risk factor for *Clostridium difficile* infection (CDI). Probiotics are often recommended to mitigate CDI symptoms; however, there exists only limited evidence showing probiotic efficacy for CDI. Here, we examined changes to the GI microbiota in a study population where probiotic treatment was associated with significantly reduced duration of CDI diarrhea. Subjects being treated with standard of care antibiotics for a primary episode of CDI were randomized to probiotic treatment or placebo for 4 weeks. Probiotic treatment consisted of a daily multi-strain capsule (*Lactobacillus acidophilus* NCFM, ATCC 700396; *Lactobacillus paracasei* Lpc-37, ATCC SD5275; *Bifidobacterium lactis* Bi-07, ATCC SC5220; *Bifidobacterium lactis* B1-04, ATCC SD5219) containing 1.7 x 1010 CFUs. Stool was collected and analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing. Microbiome analysis revealed apparent taxonomic differences between treatments and timepoints. Subjects administered probiotics had reduced Verrucomicrobiaceae at week 8 compared to controls. *Bacteroides* were significantly reduced between weeks 0 to 4 in probiotic treated subjects. *Ruminococcus* (family Lachnospiraceae), tended to be more abundant at week 8 than week 4 within the placebo group and at week 8 than week 0 within the probiotic group. Similar to these results, previous studies have associated these taxa with probiotic use and with mitigation of CDI symptoms. Compositional prediction of microbial community function revealed that subjects in the placebo group had microbiomes enriched with the iron complex transport system, while probiotic treated subjects had microbiomes enriched with the antibiotic transport system. Results indicate that probiotic use may impact the microbiome function in the face of a CDI; yet, more sensitive methods with higher resolution are warranted to better elucidate the roles associated with these changes. Continuing studies are needed to better understand probiotic effects on microbiome structure and function and the resulting impacts on CDI.

PMID: 30265691 PMCID: PMC6161886
